---
title: How France has chosen hope
teaser: How the French presidential election unfolded.
image: /images/logo.png
category: politics
tags: [france]
---
Sunday, France firmly refused to give itself to the ongoing rise of extremisms.


Emmanuel Macron, the president-elect of France, arrived first in the polls with
more than 65% of the vote in an historical election in which the french
far-right party turned into the second political force of the country with a
score of 34%.  The rate of abstention, estimated at 25%, has never reached such
a level in a presidential election since 1969.

Emmanuel Macron, 39, will be the youngest president since France's Fifth
Republic was created back in 1958 by the famous french leader Charles de
Gaulle. Former Inspector of Finances in the French Ministry of Economy, member
of the Socialist Party from 2006 to 2009, he graduated in the same schools than
most of France's political class. After four years spent as an investment
banker, he joined the government of the particularly unpopular French president
Fran√ßois Hollande. He left the office in 2016 to form its own political party.

On his conquest for the french presidency, he was rallied by many well-known
personalities of the french political scene, regardless of their backgrounds
and convictions. He arrived first with a short advance in a first turn that saw
four candidates reaching scores close to or above 20% of the poll.

In the second turn of this election the far-right candidate Marine Le Pen had
to overcome an unexpectedly declining support that opinion polls failed to
predict.  During the presidential debate between the two candidates qualified
for the final vote, the french people got a shocking reminder of what extremism
looks like. Even though it tried to sanitize staffs and straighten the
approach, this is more than ever a growing danger to a nation's project and
unity.  Unfortunately people tend to forget about the crude and harsh reality.
In 2002 when Jacques Chirac was confronted to the same situation than Emmanuel
Macron, he refused to participate to the decisive encounter with the leader of
the far-right party and won the election with more than 82% of the vote. During
all this time, the lack of debate on facts, ideas and projects with such
political movements have implicitely grown their credibility in the eyes of
people disappointed by historical french political branches.

This time, Macron accepted the debate, and this decision has probably saved the
country. Marine Le Pen strategy was to permanently attack Macron on its
relations with the system, while unpleasantly displaying a struck dumb smile on
each attack. This could be interpreted as a will to copy the strategy of Donald
Trump, expecting a similar outcome. However, the situation was completely
different, on one side Hillary Clinton spent decades in the american political
arena while Macron is a newcomer with only three years of public political
life, four times less than its accuser.

Fortunately, people of France does not compare to any other when it comes to
politics. This attitude was seen as a disgraceful proof of incompetence,
inaptitude to govern and a lack of the stature required to accede to the
presidential function. The score of Sunday may be the final blow to Le Pen's
political group.
